Lorem Ipsum Dolor. The Text/Image Relationship in
the Process of Producing Analogue and Digital
Graphics †
Gianluca Camillini 1, * and Jonathan Pierini 2
Faculty of Design and Art—Free University of Bozen/Bolzano, Piazza Università 1, 39100 Bolzano (BZ), Italy
I.S.I.A. Urbino (Istituto Superiore per le Industrie Artistiche), Via Santa Chiara 36, 61029 Urbino (PU), Italy
* Correspondence: gianluca.camillini@unibz.it; Tel.: +34-0669-2166
† Presented at the International and Interdisciplinary Conference IMMAGINI? Image and Imagination
between Representation, Communication, Education and Psychology, Brixen, Italy, 27–28 November 2017.
1
2
Published: 24 November 2017
Abstract: This essay takes a practical viewpoint—that of a graphic designer, a creator of visual
messages that assembles text and images in a single product—and examines case studies in which
the type becomes an image using different methods depending on the context in which it is
employed. The historical considerations are an opportunity to highlight how every graphic
designer is required to develop their own personal approach to the text/image relationship, which
is necessarily influenced by the period and the technologies used but also defined by their own
personal creativity and graphical style, by their specific skills and expertise, as well as by the goals
of the message.
Keywords: typography; graphic design; design history; futurism; typography as image; text/image
relationship; analogue and digital graphic; mass communication; visual culture
1. Introduction
The relationship between text and images has been widely examined. From an artistic
perspective, many works over the centuries have closely tested the boundary between the image and
the text for highly different purposes (For a good overview: Parmiggiani, C. (ed.) Alfabeto in sogno.
Dal carme figurato alla poesia concreta. Mazzotta: Milan, Italy, 2002). More recently, this has occurred as
part of studies into semiotics, and more specifically in the work of academics and designers that
propose and work according to a definition of inclusive writing that not only considers the form of
the sign but also the relationships between the different signs in the space (Two Italian reference
works are: Lussu, G. La lettera uccide: storie di grafica, Stampa Alternativa & Graffiti: Viterbo, Italy,
1999. and Perondi L. Sinsemie. Scritture nello spazio. Stampa Alternativa & Graffiti: Viterbo, Italy,
2012). With this in mind, this essay takes a practical viewpoint—that of a graphic designer, a creator
of visual messages that assembles text and images in a single product—and examines case studies in
which the type becomes an image using different methods depending on the context in which it is
employed. The historical considerations are an opportunity to highlight how every graphic designer
is required to develop their own personal approach to the text/image relationship, which is
necessarily influenced by the period and the technologies used but also defined by their own
personal creativity and graphical style, by their specific skills and expertise, as well as by the goals of
the message.
